+++
title = "Ability Scores"
description = ""
date = 2018-05-15
+++
# Ability Scores
## Strength
Strength is a measure of muscle, endurance and stamina combined.
Strength is the prime requisite of fighters, and those fighters with a strength of 16 or more gain a bonus of 10% of earned experience (explained later). Furthermore, fighters with an 18 strength are entitled to roll percentile dice in order to generate a random number between 01 and 00 (100) to determine exceptional strength.

### Strength Table I.
<table>
<tr><th>Ability score</th><th>General information</th></tr>
<tr><td>3</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>4</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>5</td><td>Here or lower the character can only be a <b>mage</b></td></tr>
<tr><td>6</td><td>Minimum strength for a <b>gnome</b>, <b>half-orc</b> or <b>halfling</b> character</tr>
<tr><td>7</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>8</td><td>Minimum strength for a <b>dwarf</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>9</td><td>Minimum strength for a <b>fighter</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>11</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>12</td><td>Minimum strength for an <b>assassin</b> or <b>paladin</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>13</td><td>Minimum strength for a <b>ranger</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>14</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>15</td><td>Minimum strength for a <b>monk</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>17</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a <b>halfling</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td><td>Maxmimum strength possible for all <b>non-fighter</b> characters</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/01-50</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a <b>gnome</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/51-75</td><td>Maximum strength possible for an <b>elf</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/76-90</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a <b>half-elf</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/91-99</td><td>Maximum strength possible for a <b>dwarf</b> or <b>half-orc</b> character</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/00</td><td>Maximum <b>human</b> strength</td></tr>
</table>

### Strength Table II.: Ability Adjustments
<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th><th>Hit Probability</th><th>Damage Adjustment</th><th>Weight Allowance</th><th>Open Doors On A</th><th>Bend Bars/ Lift Gates</th></tr>
<tr><td>3</td><td>-3</td><td>-1</td><td>5%</td><td>1</td><td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>4-5</td><td>-2</td><td>-1</td><td>10%</td><td>1</td><td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>6-7</td><td>-1</td><td>0</td><td>15%</td><td>1</td><td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>8-9</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>20%</td><td>2</td><td>1%</td></tr>
<tr><td>10-11</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>20%</td><td>2</td><td>2%</td></tr>
<tr><td>12-13</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>25%</td><td>2</td><td>4%</td></tr>
<tr><td>14-15</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>30%</td><td>2</td><td>7%</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td><td>0</td><td>+1</td><td>40%</td><td>3</td><td>10%</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td><td>+1</td><td>+1</td><td>50%</td><td>3</td><td>13%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td><td>+1</td><td>+2</td><td>60%</td><td>3</td><td>16%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/01-50</td><td>+1</td><td>+3</td><td>80%</td><td>3</td><td>20%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/51-75</td><td>+2</td><td>+3</td><td>100%</td><td>4</td><td>25%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/76-90</td><td>+2</td><td>+4</td><td>120%</td><td>4</td><td>30%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/91-99</td><td>+2</td><td>+5</td><td>145%</td><td>4 (1)&dagger;</td><td>35%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18/00</td><td>+3</td><td>+6</td><td>170%</td><td>5 (2)&dagger;</td><td>40%</td></tr>
</table>

&dagger;*The number in parentheses is the chance (the given number over six) for the fighter to be able to force open a locked, barred, magically held, or wizard locked door, but only one attempt ever (per door) may be made, and if it fails no further attempts can succeed.*

#### Notes regarding Strength Table II.
*Hit Probability* adjustments refer to the score generated by dice roll in **melee combat**. Subtraction from or addition to the number rolled is made according to the table as applicable.

*Damage Adjustment* likewise applies to **melee combat**. The damage done by scoring a successful hit on an opponent is adjusted downwards or upwards as applicable. Thus, if a hit would normally score 1-6 hit points of damage upon the opponent, and the character’s strength was only 3, the actual damage done would be reduced by 1 point; but, on the other hand, if the attacker had strength of 18/00, the actual damage done would be adjusted upwards by 6 hit points, and possible damage would jump from 1-6 to 7-12.

*Weight Allowance* is given in terms of maximum percentage of body weight which the character can carry unencumbered (See **Movement**). A 100 lb. character with a strength of 3 could carry 5 lb. unencumbered; if the same character instead had a strength of 18/00, they could carry 170 lb. unencumbered.

*Open Doors* indicates the number of chances out of 6 which the character has of opening a stuck or heavy door on that try. Successive attempts may be made at no penalty with regard to damage to the character attempting to force the door open, but each such attempt requires time and makes considerable noise.

*Bend Bars/Lift Gates* states the percentage chance the character has of bending normal soft iron bars or of lifting a vertically moving gate (such as a small portcullis barring a passage). The attempt may be made but once, and if the score required is not made, the character will never succeed in the task.


## Intelligence
Intelligence includes mnemonic ability, reasoning, and learning ability outside those measured by the written word.
Intelligence affects a character's ability to learn new skills and improve their understanding thereof.
Intelligence is the major characteristic of mages, and those with intelligence of 16 or more gain a bonus of 10% of earned experience.

### Intelligence Table I.

<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th><th>General Information</th><th>Knowledge Adjustment</th></tr>
<tr><td>3</td><td/><td>0</td>-3</tr>
<tr><td>4</td><td>Minimum intelligence for a <b>half-elf</b> character</td><td>-2</td></tr>
<tr><td>5</td><td>Here or lower the character can only be a <b>fighter</b></td><td>-1</td></tr>
<tr><td>6</td><td>Minimum intelligence for a <b>halfling</b> character</td><td>-1</td></tr>
<tr><td>7</td><td>Minimum intelligence for a <b>gnome</b> character</td><td>-1</td></tr>
<tr><td>8</td><td>Minimum intelligence for an <b>elf</b> character</td><td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>9</td><td>Minimum intelligence for a <b>paladin</b> or <b>mage</b> character</td><td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td><td>Minimum intelligence for use of 5th level magic spells</td><td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>11</td><td>Minimum intelligence for an <b>assassin</b> character</td><td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>12</td><td>Minimum intelligence for use of 6th level magic spells</td><td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>13</td><td>Minimum intelligence for a <b>ranger</b> character</td><td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>14</td><td>Minimum intelligence for use of 7th level magic spells</td><td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>15</td><td>Minimum intelligence for an <b>illusionist</b> character</td><td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td><td>Minimum intelligence for use of 8th level magic spells</td><td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td><td>Maximum intelligence for a <b>half-orc</b> character</td><td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td><td>Minimum intelligence for use of 9th level magic spells</td><td>2</td></tr>
<tr><td>19</td><td></td><td>3</td></tr>
</table>

#### Notes on Intelligence Table I.

*Knowledge Adjustment* states the roll bonus when gaining new knowledge points.
On level up, when a character gains additional points of knowledge in skills, they add or subtract the score from their roll as applicable.
*Note that the lowest roll for knowledge points earned per level is 1.*

### Intelligence Table II.: Ability for Mages

<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th><th>Chance to Know Each Listed Spell</th><th>Min # of Spells/Level</th><th>Max # of Spells/Level</th></tr>
<tr><td>9</td><td>35%</td><td>4</td><td>6</td></tr>
<tr><td>10-12</td><td>45%</td><td>5</td><td>7</td></tr>
<tr><td>13-14</td><td>55%</td><td>6</td><td>9</td></tr>
<tr><td>15-16</td><td>65%</td><td>7</td><td>11</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td><td>75%</td><td>8</td><td>14</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td><td>85%</td><td>9</td><td>18</td></tr>
<tr><td>19 or more</td><td>95%</td><td>10</td><td>All</td></tr>
</table>

#### Notes regarding Intelligence Table II.

Whenever a new spell level becomes available, a <b>mage</b> must roll against each possible spell listed of that level to know which of these spells they will be able to learn. These are checked only the one time that a new spell level becomes available.

*Chance to Know Each Listed Spell* pertains to the percentage chance the character has to learn any given spell in the level group. The character may select spells desired in any order they wish. Each spell may be checked only once. Percentile dice are rolled, and if the number generated is equal to or less than the percentage chance shown, then the character can learn and thus know that spell if acquired and added to the character’s spell book.

*Min # of Spells/Level* states the fewest number of spells by level group that a <b>mage</b> can learn. If one complete check through all spells in the level group fails to generate the minimum number given, the character may selectively go back through the group, checking each spell they failed to know once again. This process continues until the minimum number requirement has been fulfilled. This means, then, that certain spells, when located, can be learned – while certain other spells can never be learned and the dice rolls indicate which ones are in each category.

*Max # of Spells/Level* is the obverse of the minimum number which can be known by a <b>mage</b> (i.e. the maximum number they can have in their spell books). As soon as this maximum is reached, the character may not check any further in the level group.

*Change in Intelligence*: If intelligence goes down or up for any reason, and such change is relatively permanent, the <b>mage</b> must check again as explained above for known spells by level group.

*Acquisition of Heretofore Unknown Spells*: Although the <b>mage</b> must immediately cease checking to determine if spells are known after the first complete check of each spell in the level group, or immediately thereafter during successive checks when the minimum number of spells which can be known is reached, it is possible to acquire knowledge of additional spells previously unknown as long as this does not violate the maximum number of spells which can be known. New spells can be gained from captured or otherwise acquired spell books or from scrolls of magic spells. In the latter event the scroll is destroyed in learning and knowing the new spell or spells. (This subject is detailed more fully in the section explaining <b>mages</b> as characters.)


## Wisdom
Wisdom is a composite term for the character’s judgement, wile, will power, and (to a certain extent) intuitiveness.
Wisdom is of utmost importance to <b>clerics</b>, their major characteristic, and those with wisdom of 16 or greater add 10% to earned experience.
Furthermore, <b>clerics</b> with exceptional wisdom (16 or greater) also gain bonus spells over and above the number they are normally able to use.

### Wisdom Table I.

<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th> <th>General Information</th> <th>Magical Attack Adjustment&dagger;</th></tr>
<tr><td>3</td> <td></td> <td>-3</td></tr>
<tr><td>4</td> <td></td> <td>-2</td></tr>
<tr><td>5</td> <td>Here or lower the character can only be a <b>thief</b></td> <td>-1</td></tr>
<tr><td>6</td> <td></td> <td>-1</td></tr>
<tr><td>7</td> <td></td> <td>-1</td></tr>
<tr><td>8</td> <td></td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>9</td> <td>Minimum wisdom for a <b>cleric</b> character</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td> <td></td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>11</td> <td></td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>12</td> <td>Minimum wisdom for a <b>druid</b> character</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>13</td> <td>Minimum wisdom for a <b>paladin</b> or multi-classed half-elven <b>cleric</b> character</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>14</td> <td>Minimum wisdom for a <b>ranger</b> character</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>15</td> <td>Minimum wisdom for a <b>monk</b> character</td> <td>+1</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td> <td>Maximum wisdom for a <b>half-orc</b> character</td> <td>+2</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td> <td>Maximum wisdom for a <b>halfling</b> character<br/>Minimum wisdom for use of 6th level spells</td> <td>+3</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td> <td>Minimum wisdom for use of 7th level spells</td> <td>+4</td></tr>
<tr><td>19</td> <td></td> <td>+5</td></tr>
</table>

&dagger;*This adjustment applies to the saving throw of the character in question, the penalty for low wisdom, or the bonus for high wisdom, being used to alter the result of the die roll accordingly. The adjustment applies only to mental attack forms involving will force, e.g. beguiling, charming, fear, hypnosis, illusion, magic jarring, mass charming, phantasmal forces, possession, rulership, suggestion, telepathic attack, etc.*

### Wisdom Table II.: Adjustments for Clerics
<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th> <th>Spell Bonus</th> <th>Chance of Spell Failure</th></tr>
<tr><td>9</td> <td>none</td> <td>20%</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td> <td>none</td> <td>15%</td></tr>
<tr><td>11</td> <td>none</td> <td>10%</td></tr>
<tr><td>12</td> <td>none</td> <td>5%</td></tr>
<tr><td>13</td> <td>One 1st level</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>14</td> <td>One 1st level</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>15</td> <td>One 2nd level</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td> <td>One 2nd level</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td> <td>One 3rd level&dagger;</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td> <td>One 4th level&Dagger;</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>19</td> <td>One 5th level</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
</table>

&dagger;*Minimum wisdom for use of 6th level spells*

&Dagger;*Minimum wisdom for use of 7th level spells*

#### Notes regarding Wisdom Table II.
*Spell bonus* indicates the number of additional spells the <b>cleric</b> is entitled to according to wisdom ability score. 
*Note that these spells are only available when the <b>cleric</b> is entitled to spells of the applicable level.* 
Bonus spells are cumulative, so a <b>cleric</b> with 14 wisdom is entitled to two 1st level bonus spells, one with 15 wisdom has two 1st and one 2nd level bonus spells, etc.

*Chance of Spell Failure* states the percentage chance of failure <b>clerics</b> with low wisdom risk when casting spells.
To determine is a spell fails, percentile dice are rolled, and if the number generated is equal to or less than the number shown for failure, the spell is expended and has absolutely no effect whatsoever.


## Dexterity
Dexterity encompasses a number of physical attributes including hand-eye coordination, agility, reflexes, precision, balance and speed of movement.

Dexterity is the major characteristic of the <b>thief</b> class of character, and it affects their professional activities (such as picking pockets, opening locks, and so forth) accordingly. Thieves with a dexterity ability score of 16 or more gain a bonus of 10% of earned experience.

### Dexterity Table I.
<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th> <th>General Information</th> <th>Reaction/Attacking Adjustment</th> <th>Defensive Adjustment</th></tr>
<tr><td>3</td> <td></td> <td>-3</td> <td>+4</td></tr>
<tr><td>4</td> <td></td> <td>-2</td> <td>+3</td></tr>
<tr><td>5</td> <td>Here or lower the character can only be a <b>cleric</b></td> <td>-1</td> <td>+2</td></tr>
<tr><td>6</td> <td>Minimum dexterity for a <b>half-elf</b> or <b>mage</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>+1</td></tr>
<tr><td>7</td> <td>Minimum dexterity for an <b>elf</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>8</td> <td>Minimum dexterity for a <b>halfling</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>9</td> <td>Minimum dexterity for a <b>thief</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td> <td></td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>11</td> <td></td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>12</td> <td>Minimum dexterity for an <b>assassin</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>13</td> <td></td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>14</td> <td></td> <td>0</td> <td>0</td></tr>
<tr><td>15</td> <td>Minimum dexterity for a <b>monk</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>-1</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td> <td>Minimum dexterity for an <b>illusionist</b> character</td> <td>+1</td> <td>-2</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td> <td>Maximum dexterity for a <b>dwarf</b> character</td> <td>+2</td> <td>-3</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td> <td></td> <td>+3</td> <td>-4</td></tr>
<tr><td>19</td> <td></td> <td>+4</td> <td>-5</td></tr>
</table>

#### Notes regarding Dexterity Table I.
*Reaction/Attacking Adjustment* is the penalty or bonus for both surprise situations and ‘to hit’ when performing missile combat attacks.

*Defensive Adjustment* refers to the penalty or bonus applicable to a character’s saving throws against certain forms of attack (such as fire ball, lightning bolts, etc.) due to dodging ability. It also applies to the character’s parrying and/or dodging ability in missile or melee combat; in this case the penalty subtracts from the armour class of the character, making them easier to hit, while the bonus adds to the defensive value of the character’s armour class, making them harder to hit. Thus, a character with a baseline armour class of 2 with 3 dexterity has an armour class of 6 (2 + 4). However, if the same character has a dexterity of 18, their armour class would be -2 (2 – 4).

### Dexterity Table II.: Adjustments for Thieves
<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th> <th>Picking Pockets</th> <th>Spotting Traps</th></tr>
<tr><td>9</td> <td>-15%</td> <td>-10%</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td> <td>-10%</td> <td>-10%</td></tr>
<tr><td>11</td> <td>-5%</td> <td>-5%</td></tr>
<tr><td>12</td> <td>0%</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>13</td> <td>0%</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>14</td> <td>0%</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>15</td> <td>0%</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td> <td>0%</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td> <td>+5%</td> <td>0%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td> <td>+10%</td> <td>+5%</td></tr>
</table>

#### Notes regarding Dexterity Table II.
*Picking Pockets* states the percentage adjustment to be made to the <b>thief</b>’s base chance of picking a chosen target’s pockets for a particular item.
*Spotting Traps* states the percentage adjustment to be made to the <b>thief</b>’s base chance of passively spotting traps in a given room.
More information can be found in Character Classes, Thieves.


## Constitution
Constitution is a term which encompasses the character’s physique, fitness, health, and resistance.
Constitution scores above a certain number are necessary for becoming certain sub-classes of characters (<b>paladins</b>, <b>rangers</b> and <b>monks</b>).

### Constitution Table
<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th> <th>General Information</th> <th>Hit Point Adjustment</th> <th>System Shock Survival</th> <th>Resurrection Survival</th></tr>
<tr><td>3</td> <td></td> <td>-2</td> <td>35%</td> <td>40%</td></tr>
<tr><td>4</td> <td></td> <td>-1</td> <td>40%</td> <td>45%</td></tr>
<tr><td>5</td> <td>Here or lower the character can only be an <b>illusionist</b></td> <td>-1</td> <td>45%</td> <td>50%</td></tr>
<tr><td>6</td> <td>Minimum constitution for an <b>elf</b> or <b>half-elf</b> character</td> <td>-1</td> <td>50%</td> <td>55%</td></tr>
<tr><td>7</td> <td>Minimum constitution for a <b>fighter</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>55%</td> <td>60%</td></tr>
<tr><td>8</td> <td>Minimum constitution for a <b>gnome</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>60%</td> <td>65%</td></tr>
<tr><td>9</td> <td>Minimum constitution for a <b>paladin</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>65%</td> <td>70%</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td> <td>Minimum constitution for a <b>halfling</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>70%</td> <td>75%</td></tr>
<tr><td>11</td> <td>Minimum constitution for a <b>monk</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>75%</td> <td>80%</td></tr>
<tr><td>12</td> <td>Minimum constitution for a <b>dwarf</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>80%</td> <td>85%</td></tr>
<tr><td>13</td> <td>Minimum constitution for a <b>half-orc</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>85%</td> <td>90%</td></tr>
<tr><td>14</td> <td>Minimum constitution for a <b>ranger</b> character</td> <td>0</td> <td>88%</td> <td>92%</td></tr>
<tr><td>15</td> <td></td> <td>+1</td> <td>91%</td> <td>94%</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td> <td></td> <td>+2</td> <td>95%</td> <td>96%</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td> <td></td> <td>+2 (+3)&dagger;</td> <td>97%</td> <td>98%</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td> <td></td> <td>+2 (+4)&dagger;</td> <td>99%</td> <td>100%</td></tr>
<tr><td>19</td> <td></td> <td>+2 (+5)&dagger;</td> <td>100%</td> <td>100%</td></tr>
</table>

&dagger;*Bonus applies only to <b>fighters</b>; all other classes may be given a maximum hit point bonus adjustment for constitution of +2.*

#### Notes regarding Constitution Table
*Hit Point Adjustment* indicates the subtraction from or addition to each hit die for a character. Note that subtraction can never reduce any hit die below 1, even if the roll is less than or equal to the hit point adjustment penalty. Note also that the only class of characters which is entitled to bonuses above +2 is <b>fighters</b> (including the <b>fighter</b> sub-classes <b>assassins</b>, <b>paladins</b> and <b>rangers</b>).

*System Shock Survival* states the percentage chance the character has of surviving the following forms of magical attack (or simple application of magic): aging, petrification (including flesh to stone spell), polymorph any object, polymorph others. Two saving throws must be made when these effects are undergone: one to survive the spell, and a second (on success of the first) to determine if the spell takes effect (save failed) or if it is dispelled (save succeeded).

*Resurrection Survival* shows the percentage chance the character has of being successfully raised from the dead or resurrected by a <b>cleric</b>. The score of the percentile dice must be equal to or less than the number shown on the table, or the character fails to be revivified and is completely and totally dead forever.
A character’s initial constitution is also the maximum number of times the character can be raised from the dead/resurrected, and that each such revivification reduces the character’s constitution score by 1.
Although a character’s constitution score can be restored to its former score, or even raised above this number by magical means, this in no way alters the initial score limitation, nor does such magical change in constitution restore to the character additional chances for revivification.
Thus, if a character has an initial constitution of 15, they can never be brought back to life by a raise dead or resurrection spell more often than 15 times.


## Charisma

Charisma is the measure of the character’s combined physical attractiveness, persuasiveness, and personal magnetism.
Charisma scores above a certain number are necessary for becoming certain sub-classes of characters (<b>druids</b> and <b>paladins</b>).

### Charisma Table
<table>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th> <th>General Information</th> <th>Maximum # of Henchmen&dagger;</th></tr>
<tr><td>3</td> <td></td> <td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>4</td> <td></td> <td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>5</td> <td>Here or lower the character can only be an <b>assassin</b></td> <td>2</td></tr>
<tr><td>6</td> <td></td> <td>2</td></tr>
<tr><td>7</td> <td></td> <td>3</td></tr>
<tr><td>8</td> <td>Minimum charisma for an <b>elf</b> character</td> <td>3</td></tr>
<tr><td>9</td> <td></td> <td>4</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td> <td></td> <td>4</td></tr>
<tr><td>11</td> <td></td> <td>5</td></tr>
<tr><td>12</td> <td></td> <td>5</td></tr>
<tr><td>13</td> <td></td> <td>6</td></tr>
<tr><td>14</td> <td>Maximum charisma for a <b>half-orc</b> character</td> <td>6</td></tr>
<tr><td>15</td> <td>Minimum charisma for a <b>druid</b> character</td> <td>7</td></tr>
<tr><td>16</td> <td>Maximum charisma for a <b>dwarf</b> character</td> <td>8</td></tr>
<tr><td>17</td> <td>Minimum charisma for a <b>paladin</b> character</td> <td>10</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td> <td></td> <td>15</td></tr>
</table>

&dagger;*Refers to the number of non-player characters who will serve as permanent retainers of the player character. It does not affect the number of mercenary soldiers, men-at-arms, servitors, and similar persons in the pay of the character.*
