+++
title = "Races"
description = ""

date = 2018-05-16
+++
# Races

## Character Race Table I.: Class Limitations

<table>
<tr><th/> <th colspan="7">Character's Race</th></tr>
<tr><th>Class</th> <th>Dwarf</th> <th>Elf</th> <th>Gnome</th> <th>Half-elf</th> <th>Halfling</th> <th>Half-orc</th> <th>Human</th></tr>
<tr><td>Cleric</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Druid</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Fighter</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Paladin</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td></tr>
<tr><td>Ranger</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Mage</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Illusionist</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Thief</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Assassin</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Monk</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
<tr><td>Bard</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td> <td>no</td> <td>no</td> <td>yes</td></tr>
</table>

## Racial Ability Scores

### Penalties and Bonuses for Race

Certain racial stocks excel in certain ability areas and have shortcomings in others.
These penalties and bonuses are applied to the initial ability scores generated by a player for their character as soon as the racial stock of the character is selected, and the modified ability scores then are considered as if they were the actual ability scores generated for all game purposes.
These penalties and bonuses are shown below:

<table>
<tr><th>Race</th> <th>Penalty or Bonus</th></tr>
<tr><td>Dwarf</td> <td>Constitution +1; Charisma -1</td></tr>
<tr><td>Elf</td> <td>Dexterity +1; Constitution -1</td></tr>
<tr><td>Halfling</td> <td>Dexterity +1; Strength -1</td></tr>
<tr><td>Half-orc</td> <td>Strength +1; Constitution +1; Charisma -2</td></tr>
</table>

### Character Ability Scores by Racial Type

Non- and part-human races must meet certain minimum ability scores, and some races have lower maximum possible scores as well.
In order for a player character to be of one of these races, these minimums and maximums must be met.
The minimum scores must have been generated in the initial abilities rolls, or if bonuses are given for the race, then the minimums must be met considering such bonuses.
Maximums applicable are easily met, for the ability score is simply lowered to conform to the maximum.

### Character Race Table II.: Ability Score Minimums & Maximums

<table>
<tr><th/> <th colspan="6">Character's Race</th></tr>
<tr><th>Ability Score</th> <th>Dwarf</th> <th>Elf</th> <th>Gnome</th> <th>Half-elf</th> <th>Halfling</th> <th>Half-orc</th></tr>
<tr><td>Strength\*</td> <td>8-18</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>6-18</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>6-17</td> <td>6-18</td></tr>
<tr><td>Intelligence</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>8-18</td> <td>7-18</td> <td>4-18</td> <td>6-18</td> <td>3-17</td></tr>
<tr><td>Wisdom</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>3-17</td> <td>3-16</td></tr>
<tr><td>Dexterity</td> <td>3-17</td> <td>7-19</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>6-18</td> <td>8-19</td> <td>3-17</td></tr>
<tr><td>Constitution</td> <td>12-19</td> <td>6-17</td> <td>8-18</td> <td>6-18</td> <td>10-18</td> <td>13-19</td></tr>
<tr><td>Charisma</td> <td>3-16</td> <td>8-18</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>3-18</td> <td>3-14</td></tr>
</table>

\*<i>As noted previously, fighters of all races might be entitled to an exceptional strength bonus.</i>

#### Notes regarding Character Race Table II.

Scores are listed from minimum to maximum.

## Race Descriptions

### Dwarves

Dwarves can be [clerics](./wiki/characters/cleric.md), [fighters](./wiki/characters/fighter.md), **thieves** and [assassins](./wiki/characters/assassin.md), or any multi-classed combination of these races.

Because of their very nature, dwarves are non-magical and do not ever use magical spells. However, this nature gives them a bonus with regard to their saving throws against attacks by magic wands, staves, rods and spells. This bonus is +1 for every 3½ points of constitution ability. Thus, if a dwarf had a constitution of 7 they would gain a +2 on dice rolls made as saving throws, at 14 constitution the bonus would be +4, and at 18 constitution the bonus would be the maximum normally possible, +5.

Similarly, dwarves have exceptional constitutional strength with regard to toxic substances, ingested or injected. Therefore, all dwarven characters make **saving throws against poison** in the same manner and with the same bonuses as they do against magical attacks from wands, staves, rods, and spells.

All dwarves are able to speak the following languages: dwarven, gnome, goblin, kobold, and orcish; in addition, dwarven characters are able to speak the “common tongue” of all humankind. However, they are unable to learn more than two additional languages regardless of their intelligence ability.

Dwarves are able to see radiation in the **infra-red spectrum**, so they can see up to 60’ in the dark noting varying degrees of heat radiation. This ability is known as “infravision.”

Dwarves are miners of great skill. They are able to detect the following facts when within 10’ or less of the particular phenomenon (except determination of approximate depth, which can be done at any distance):

<table>
<tr><tr><th>Form of Detection</th> <th>Chance of Success</th></tr></tr>
<tr><td>Detect grade or slope in passage, upwards or downwards</td> <td>3 in 4</td></tr>
<tr><td>Detect new construction or passage/tunnel</td> <td>7 in 10</td></tr>
<tr><td>Detect sliding or shifting walls or rooms</td> <td>2 in 3</td></tr>
<tr><td>Detect traps involving pits, falling blocks and other stonework</td> <td>1 in 2</td></tr>
<tr><td>Determine approximate depth underground</td> <td>1 in 2</td></tr>
</table>

This information is passively perceived thanks to years spent in training or as a child within dwarven mines.
It does not need to be actively rolled to determine.

In melee combat, dwarves add 1 to their dice rolls to hit opponents who are half-orcs, goblins, hobgoblins or orcs.
When being attacked by ogres, trolls, ogre magi, giants, and/or titans, dwarves subtract 4 from their opponents’ ‘to hit’ dice rolls because of the dwarves’ small size and combat ability against these much bigger creatures.

As has already been noted, dwarven characters get a penalty of 1 on their charisma score due to racial characteristics.
However, dwarven characters do not suffer charisma penalties nor are they limited to a 16 charisma maximum with regard to their own race.
Thus, a dwarf character may have additional dwarven henchmen up to their maximum before racial adjustments, but must obey a maximum number of non-dwarven henchmen up to their maximum after racial adjustments.

### Elves

Elves can be [clerics](./wiki/characters/cleric.md), [fighters](./wiki/characters/fighter.md), [rangers](./wiki/characters/ranger.md), [mages](./wiki/characters/mage.md), **thieves**, and [assassins](./wiki/characters/assassin.md), or any multi-classed combination of these races.

Elven characters have a 90% **resistance to sleep and charm** spells (if these spells are cast upon them a percentile dice roll of 91% or better is required to allow the magic any chance of having an effect, and even then the saving throw against spells is allowed versus the charm spell).

When employing either a bow of any sort other than a crossbow, or a short or long sword, elven characters gain a bonus of +1 on their die rolls ‘to hit.’

All elven characters are able to speak the following languages: elvish, gnome, halfling, goblin, hobgoblin, orcish, gnoll and the “common tongue” of mankind. Elven characters of above 15 intelligence are able to learn one additional language for every point of language above 15, i.e. a character with an 18 intelligence could learn three additional languages.

Elves have the ability to see into the **infra-red spectrum**, so they are able to see up to 60’ in darkness, noting varying degrees of heat radiation.

Secret or concealed doors are difficult to hide from elves. Elves have a 1 in 6 chance of noticing the latter when passing within 10’. If actively searching for such doors, elven characters have a 2 in 6 chance to find a secret door and a 3 in 6 chance to discover a concealed portal.

If alone and not in metal armour (or if well in advance – 90’ or more – of a party which does not consist entirely of elves and/or halflings) an elven character moves so silently that they will **surprise** monsters on a 4 in 6 chance unless some portal must be opened in order to confront the monster. In the latter case the chance for surprise drops to a 2 in 6 chance.

### Gnomes

Gnomes can be [clerics](./wiki/characters/cleric.md), [fighters](./wiki/characters/fighter.md), [illusionists](./wiki/characters/illusionist.md), **thieves**, and [assassins](./wiki/characters/assassin.md), or any multi-classed combination of these races.

Similar to their cousins, the dwarves, gnomes are highly **resistant to magic**. A gnome player character gains a bonus with regard to their saving throws against attacks by magic wands, staves, rods and spells. This bonus is +1 for every 3½ points of constitution ability, the same as for dwarven characters.

Gnome characters are able to speak the following languages in addition to the “common tongue” of humanity: dwarvish, gnome, halfling, goblin, kobold, and they can also communicate with any burrowing mammal (such as moles, badgers, ground squirrels, etc.). Gnomes are unable to learn more than two languages in addition to those noted above, regardless of how high their intelligence score is.

Gnomes have **infravision**, the ability to see into the infra-red spectrum, so a gnome character is able to see up to 60’ in the dark, noting varying heat radiation.

Being miners of exceptional merit, gnomes are able to detect the following facts when within 10’ of the area to be examined, or at any distance with respect to determination of their approximate depth underground:

<table>
<tr><tr><th>Form of Detection</th> <th>Chance of Success</th></tr></tr>
<tr><td>Detect grade or slope in passage, upwards or downwards</td> <td>4 in 5</td></tr>
<tr><td>Detect unsafe walls, ceilings, or floors</td> <td>7 in 10</td></tr>
<tr><td>Determine approximate depth underground</td> <td>3 in 5</td></tr>
<tr><td>Determine direction of travel underground</td> <td>1 in 2</td></tr>
</table>

This information is passively perceived thanks to years spent in training or as a child within gnome mines. It does not need to be actively rolled to determine.

In **melee combat**, gnome characters add 1 to their dice rolls to hit opponents who are kobolds or goblins. When being attacked by gnolls, bugbears, ogres, trolls, ogre magi, giants and/or titans, gnome characters subtract 4 from their opponents’ ‘to hit’ dice rolls because of the gnomes’ small size and their combat skill against these much bigger creatures.


### Half-elves

Half-elves can be [clerics](./wiki/characters/cleric.md), [druids](./wiki/characters/druid.md), [fighters](./wiki/characters/fighter.md), [rangers](./wiki/characters/ranger.md), [mages](./wiki/characters/mage.md), **thieves**, [assassins](./wiki/characters/assassin.md) and [bards](./wiki/characters/bard.md), or any multi-classed combination of these races.

Half-elven characters have a 30% **resistance to sleep and charm** spells (if these spells are cast upon them a percentile dice roll of 31% or better is required to allow the magic any chance of having an effect, and even then the saving throw against spells is allowed versus the charm spell).

All half-elven characters are able to speak the “common tongue” of men and the following languages: elvish, gnome, halfling, goblin, hobgoblin, orcish and gnoll. Half-elven characters of above 16 intelligence are able to learn one additional language for every point of language above 16, i.e. a character with an 18 intelligence could learn two additional languages.

Half-elves have the ability to see into the **infra-red spectrum**, so they are able to see up to 60’ in darkness, noting varying degrees of heat radiation.

Secret or concealed doors are difficult to hide from half-elves, just as they are noticeable for elves. Half-elves have a 1 in 6 chance of noticing the latter when passing within 10’. If actively searching for such doors, half-elven characters have a 2 in 6 chance to find a secret door and a 3 in 6 chance to discover a concealed portal.


### Halflings

Halflings can be [clerics](./wiki/characters/cleric.md), [druids](./wiki/characters/druid.md), [fighters](./wiki/characters/fighter.md) and **thieves**, or any multi-classed combination of these races.

All halfling characters have a high **resistance to magic spells**, so for every 3½ points of constitution ability the character possesses, they gain a +1 on saving throws versus wands, staves, rods, and spells, as with dwarves and gnomes.

As halflings also have a similar **resistance to poisons** of all sorts, they gain a constitution bonus identical to that for saving throws versus magical attacks when they make saving throws versus poison.

All halflings characters are able to speak the following languages in addition to mankind’s “common tongue”: dwarvish, elvish, gnome, goblin, halfling, and orcish. Halflings with intelligence above 16 can learn one additional language for every point of language above 16, i.e. a character with an 18 intelligence could learn two additional languages.

Certain halfling characters have **infravision**. Those with mixed blood are assumed to have infravision which functions up to 30’ distant, while those of pure Stoutish blood are able to see heat radiation variation at up to 60’ (normal infravision).

Similarly, halflings of mixed type and those of pure Stoutish blood are able to note if a passage is an up or down grade 75% of the time, and they can determine direction 50% of the time. Note that this information is passively perceived thanks to years spent in training or as a child within halfling mines. It does not need to be actively rolled to determine.

If alone (or well in advance – 90’ or more – of a party which does not consist entirely of elves and/or halflings) and not in metal armour, a halfling character moves so silently that they will **surprise** monsters on a 4 in 6 chance unless some portal must be opened in order to confront the monster. In the latter case the chance for surprise drops to a 2 in 6 chance.


### Half-orcs

Half-orcs can be [clerics](./wiki/characters/cleric.md), [fighters](./wiki/characters/fighter.md), **thieves** and [assassins](./wiki/characters/assassin.md), or any multi-classed combination of these races.

Half-orc characters are able to speak the “common tongue” of humanity and orcish as well. These characters are able to learn a maximum of two additional languages.

Half-orcs have **infravision**, so that they can detect varying degrees of heat radiation up to 60’ distant in the dark.

Although half-orcs subtract 2 from their charisma, this penalty is in regard to non-half-orc non-player character henchmen only, so the initial, unaltered, charisma ability score should be recorded for purposes of recruiting half-orc non-player character henchmen.


### Humans

Humans can be [clerics](./wiki/characters/cleric.md), [druids](./wiki/characters/druid.md), [fighters](./wiki/characters/fighter.md), [paladins](./wiki/characters/paladin.md), [rangers](./wiki/characters/ranger.md), [mages](./wiki/characters/mage.md), [illusionists](./wiki/characters/illusionist.md), **thieves**, [assassins](./wiki/characters/assassin.md), [monks](./wiki/characters/monk.md) and [bards](./wiki/characters/bard.md), or any multi-classed combination of these races.
